okay so we are done with all of the calculus we
need to learn this year the last three topics are
all going to be looking at statistics and in this
one we're looking at discrete random variables
let's start by talking about what a discrete
random variable actually is in statistics we
have these things called random variables which we
denote with capital letters so for example X could
be a random variable and then y could be another
random variable a random variable is just anything
which can change so let's say we Define the random
variable X as the number of rainy days this week
then X could take any value between 0 and 7 so
for example if it rained on Monday and Tuesday
this week then X would equal 2 but the next week
it could rain on Monday Tuesday and Wednesday so
X would equal 3 we can separate random variables
into two main types discrete random variables and
continuous random variables the main difference
between these is that discrete random variables
can only take specific set values for example
the number of people in a room so there could
be 1 2 three or four people in a room but there
can't be two and a half people in a room so this
random variable can only take set values which
are whole numbers on the other hand continuous
random variables can take any value within a
range for example the height of a student this
could be 170 cm 171 cm but it could also be 170.5
or 172.5 because I can continue adding an infinite
number of decimal places onto the end the random
variable can take any value within the range and
therefore it's a continuous random variable we
say that discrete random variables are variables
we can count whereas continuous random variables
are variables that we measure okay just so we get
this idea in our head let's go through a couple of
examples so the example we gave before where X was
the number of rainy days in one week that would
be a discrete random variable because X could
only equal 0 1 2 3 all the way up to 7 it cannot
equal 2.5 for example let's do these four as well
a test score out of 40 would be a discrete random
variable because it can only equal 1 2 or 3 up to
40 some test you may be able to get 1.5 or 1.75
but it's unlikely that there are any more decimals
that can be added to that so it's still a discrete
random variable the volume of water in a bottle is
something we measure it can take any value within
a range so it's a continuous random variable same
with the weight of an apple we measure it so it's
a continuous random variable and finally the value
on the top of a dice when you roll it that can
only be 1 2 3 4 5 or 6 so it's a discrete random
variable the first thing we're going to learn
about discrete random variables is how to use
these things called probability distributions
so let's just look at this spinner on the top
left as we can see there are eight evenly spaced
spaces and they each have a different number on
them so if I spin this spinner there is an equal
chance that this Arrow would land up on any of the
spaces therefore we can define a random variable
X where X is the number displayed on the spinner
so to do this we write let x equal the number
on the spinner hopefully we can see that X is
a random variable which has possible values 1 2 3
or 4 we can find the probability distribution for
X which is the chance that x equals each of its
possible values so we write P that X is equal to
1 this means the probability that the random
variable X is equal to one now to calculate
this there are three spaces labeled one out of
of a total 8 so this probability that xal 1 is
equal to 3 8 let's do the same thing for each
of the other values so we have the probability
that X is equal to 2 and there are two spaces
labeled 2 out of 8 so that probability is 2 8
the probability that X is equal to 3 is 1 on
8 and then the probability that X is = 4 is 2
8 so this here is the probability distribution
of this random variable X it shows us each of
the possible values of X and the probability
that X takes each of those values instead of
writing this probability distribution as separate
statements we can instead display it in a table
like this so on the top we have have a little
X which represents the possible values of the
random variable so these are 1 2 3 and four and on
the bottom row we have the probability that X is
equal to each of these values so the probability
that X was 1 was 3 8 the probability that X was 2
was 2 8 and then so on this is just an easier way
to display probability distributions and it's what
we're going to be working with from now notice
one thing about this distribution that these
probabilities here all of them add up to a value
of 8 over 8 which is equal to one this should make
sense because the probability of at least one
of these happening is 100% or one so one fact
we need to know about probability distribution is
that in any probability distribution the sum of
all of the probabilities is going to be equal to
1 this symbol here is the Greek letter Sigma and
it means sum so this just says the sum of all
probabilities has to equal one let's do these
three questions on the bottom of the page so for
this probability distribution over here let's find
the probability that X is equal 2 or 1 to find
this we just add the two individual values p x = 2
is 2 8 and PX = 1 is 3 8 so the total probability
is 5 8 this means that the total probability of
getting either a 1 or a 2 is 5 8 for the next
question we have to find the probability that
X is greater than 1 you using this table we can
interpret that that means that the probability
that X is equal to 2 3 or four because these are
all greater than one to find this probability we
add up these three probabilities so that's
2 8 + 1 8 + 2 8 which is 5 8 part C says if
the probability that X is less than or equal to
an unknown value K is greater than 0.5 find the
minimum value of K now this probability statement
is a little bit hard to understand at first and
if we don't get exactly what it means then the
easiest way to do this question is just through
trial and error so we want the minimum value of
K and therefore let's start from the bottom of
the probability distribution in other words
K is equal to 1 so if K was equal to 1 Let's
substitute that into this probability statement
which should make it easier to understand we have
the probability that X is less than or equal
to 1 well we know how to calculate that the
probability that X is less than or equal to one
has possible values only one because that's the
only number here here which is less than or equal
to 1 so therefore that probability is just 3 8 we
can see that this is not yet greater than 0.5
so this is not the correct answer let's try the
next value of K if K is equal to 2 substitute
it into this probability statement we get the
probability that X is less than or equal to 2 so
hopefully we can see that what this means is that
X can equal 1 or two because both of these are
less than or equal to two this probability is
2 on 8 + 3 / 8 which is 5 8 and we can see that
this fulfils the criteria of being greater than
0.5 5 8 is greater than 0.5 so therefore the
minimum value of K which makes this statement
true is is K is equal to 2 let's have a go at
a few example questions involving probability
distributions for the one on the left we have a
probability distribution and the first thing we
need to do is find this unknown K remember what we
said on the last Slide the most important thing to
remember about all probability distributions
is that when you add all the probabilities
together they a have to equal 1 so we can use
this to find the unknown K putting this into an
equation gives us 0.1 + 0.25 + 0.3 + 0.15 + K is
equal to 1 notice how we just added together all
the probabilities and they have to add up to
one then we can just solve this equation 4 K
adding these numbers on the left gives us 0.8 + K
is equal 1 and therefore K is equal to 0.2 Part B
says given the probability X is greater than or
equal to an unknown number B is greater than 0.3
find the maximum value of B so remember how we
approached these ones again we just want to use
trial and error to make it easier to understand
so because we want the maximum value we are going
to start with the high highest value which is 1
so we say if B is equal to 1 and then sub it into
the probability this gives us the probability
that X is greater than or equal to 1 now we can
calculate this so if x is greater than or equal
to 1 the only value it can be is 1 and therefore
the probability is just K so this probability
is equal to 0.2 now 0.2 is not greater than 0.3
so because this probability doesn't fulfill
the criteria then B is not equal to one and
we try the next value down so if B is equal to 0
sub it in P that X is greater than or equal to 0
this time for X to be greater than or equal to 0
x could be 0 or 1 and therefore this probability
is 0.15 + 0.2 which is 0.35 so this is greater
than 0.3 and therefore the maximum value of B to
fulfill that criteria is B is equal to Z let's
try the question on the right now so we've got
another probability distribution and we need to
find a we're going to do this in the same way as
the previous question so we add the probabilities
and set it equal to 1 adding up these A's on the
left hand side we have 3 a + 2 a is 5 a and then
add another a on 2 this gives us 11 a / 2 then we
can subtract the 0.1 to the other side equals 0.9
and therefore a is equal to 1.8 over 11 then for
Part B we want the probability that X is between
1 and 4 now for this to occur the possible values
of X are two or three so therefore we can find the
probability by adding up these two probabilities
this gives us 3 * 1.8 11 + 2 * 1.8 11 which
I can put into my calculator to get 9 over 11
okay so apart from probability distributions the
other thing we need to know about is probability
distribution functions a probability distribution
function looks like this here we have a function
containing X and then a list of possible values
of X and this is essentially the same thing as a
probability distribution table it's just that
to get the probability that xal 1 for example
we would need to take one and sub it into the
function so P that x = 1 is 1^ 2 + 1 34 which
is 2 34 another example just so we get it if
we wanted to calculate the probability that X
is equal to 2 we would sub 2 into the function so
2^ 2 + 1 34 is 5 4 essentially we could turn this
probability distribution function into a regular
probability distribution table by just subbing
each of the values in so we've got X the possible
values of X on the top and the probability of each
of them on the bottom so the possible values of X
are listed here they are 1 2 3 and four and then
the probabilities are found by subbing each of
these numbers into the function so this gives us
2 on 34 5 on 34 10 on 34 and 17 on 34 as you might
have noticed not all functions can be probability
distribution functions because when a probability
distribution function is transformed into a
probability distribution table it still has to
fulfill the criteria of a probability distribution
table so remember that was that all of these
probabilities have to add to one so therefore
the first criteria a function must fulfill to be
a probability distribution function is that all
values of P of X must add to one we can write this
as the sum of P of x i has to equal one where this
little I is just a placeholder which signifies
that we are subbing in each of these values of X
the second condition a function must hold to to
be a probability distribution function is each
individual value of P of X must be positive we
can write this as P of X has to be greater than
or equal to Zer for example if I had a function
P of X is equal tox / 6 for x is equal to 0 1 or
2 this could not be a probability distribution
function because for example P of 1 is - 1 on
6 and we can't have a negative probability so
if we want to prove a function is a probability
distribution function we just need to show that
it adheres to both of these conditions so let's
do a few example questions this one says show that
this function here for x = 1 2 3 or 4 is a valid
probability distribution function so to show this
remember that we need to show it fulfills the two
criteria the first was that all of the values of
the probability distribution function must add to
one so we can prove this by finding each of the
values and adding them up this is the probability
that x = 1 plus p that x = 2 plus P that x = 3
plus the P that x = 4 to find this we just have
to sub each of these numbers into the function
so the first one would be 1^ 2 + 1 34 which is
2 over 34 this is the same function we looked at
in the last Slide by the way so I'm just going to
do this one a bit quicker P that x = 2 is 5 34
P that x = 3 is 10 on 34 and then P that x = 4
is 17 on 34 adding these numbers together 2 + 5
+ 10 + 17 is 34 over 34 which is 1 so therefore
we've fulfilled the first criteria we also need
to fulfill the second criteria which is that
each individual value of P of X is positive so
because we've already found all of them we can
just state that each of them are great than 0 and
therefore each individual value of the probability
distribution function is greater than zero so
because we've fulfilled the two criteria this
function is a probability distribution function
let's do another question the one on the left
says for this probability distribution function
x = 1 2 or 3 find the value of K so we can see
we've got an unknown K in the function function
but we can use the properties of a probability
distribution function to find K the first property
was that all of the values of the probability must
add to one in other words the probability that x
equal 1 plus the probability that x = 2 plus the
probability that x = 3 has to add up to 1 so we
can find each of these probabilities by subbing
them into the function this gives us k * 1 2 +
K * 2 2 + K * 3 2 and then we can solve for K so
the easiest way to do this would be to factor k
out and then we add the numbers in the brackets
so we've got 1^ 2 + 2 2 which is 4 + 3 2 which is
9 and then we get k equals and divide this whole
thing in the brackets over to the other side so 1
+ 4 + 9 is 14 and then therefore K is 1/4 for the
question on the right we're given a probability
distribution table and we need to find a function
which fits that table so this is kind of like
making a conjecture we basically want to come
up with a function such that when we Sub in one
we get this when we Sub in two we get this and so
on so we start this by writing down everything in
the probabilities that is the same we can see that
they're all over 16 so therefore the probability
distribution function has got to contain something
over 16 then we look at the thing which is
different every time so 1 3 5 and seven and
ask how can I get from this number to this number
we can see that it increases by two every time so
plus 2 + 2 + 2 and therefore the formula must
contain Ain a 2X if we take for example 2 and
we calculate 2x that would give us 4 then to get
back to three we have to do min-1 so at least for
this one the formula is 2x - 1 we just need to
check that it works for the rest so 2 * 3 is 6
6 - 1 is 5 2 4 8 - 1 is 7 and 2 1's 2 - 1 is 1
so therefore this formula works for subbing in
each of these X values to get that probability if
that was a bit confusing these questions are much
rarer and they don't come up in tests too much so
I wouldn't really worried about it and that is all
we need to know about probability distributions
so far so after watching this video you should be
able to do the following things firstly solve
problems involving probability distribution
tables then we need to know the two conditions
for a probability distribution function remember
those were that the probabilities have to add
to one and each individual probability must
be positive we need to be able to calculate
probabilities using probability distribution
functions remember we did that by just subbing in
the x value into the function and finally we need
to be able to find unknowns inside probability
distribution functions in the next video we'll
look at calcula the mean median mode variance and
standard deviation of a probability distribution